The druid is a competent spellcaster, but wild shape is his signature ability, it's what makes the class feel different compared to a nature-focused cleric. I have previously argued that there aren't many multiclass or prestige class options for the druid and that going 20 levels deep into the class is completely fine; what breaks this generic feel to the class are the wild shape choises that he will make, as they will greatly influence your spell and feat selections.

There are two main categories of wild shape forms: defensive and battle. The defensive forms are used by druids who treat wild shape as a strong defensive buff with a long duration - high natural armor, dexterity scores and alternative movement modes, especially fly, are very valuable to a spellcaster. Battle forms are used by druids who want to take a more direct approach and get into melee battle; these forms usually have strong extraordinary special attacks, like improved grab, pounce or trample and high physical scores. There is a third category of wild shape forms, but it is rarely used in battle - it's the one that you will use when you want to blend in and be inconspicuous - the utility forms, where you trade off the power of your wild shape in raw stats for subtlety.

The battle forms are very dangerous and a druid that is using them can contribute in a fight considerably, using just the special attacks that he has acquired by wild shaping into them. However, since these forms are usually not able to use conventional weapons, a druid player needs to get into a different mindset in order to play them efficiently and familiarize himself with the most common extraordinary special abilities: pounce, grapple and trample. It's also important to note that the distinction between these isn't always clear - it's possible for a form to be good at any combination like charge and trample or pounce and grapple or grapple alone.

A form that is able to grapple will almost always have access to the improved grab extraordinary special ability. Other common traits of the grappler forms are size of large or larger, a good strength score and sometimes, the constrict pr the shallow whole ability. Improved grab gives you the ability to start a grapple as a free action if you hit with a melee attack; additionally, by taking a large penalty to your grapple check you can even start a grapple without yourself being considered as grappled. Grappling is very effective against spellcasters; a spellcaster that is not prepared against the grapple maneuver will face problems against effective grapple forms. Be warned that a single teleportation spell, which often have just verbal components, is enough for a spellcaster to escape your grapple, so don't just go around grappling anyone who casts a spell! Finally, the swallow whole ability is handy, but most of the times the amount of damage required in order for the creature to exit is around 25, which is low, even though an opponent can only use a light piercing or slashing weapon to deal this damage, as he is considered grappled. This means that you need to be careful when swallowing opponents - at least try to make sure that they don't have abilities that enable them to do concentrated damage like sneak attack, power attack, etc. Last note about grappling - the grapple check includes the base attack bonus; since it's possible to assume a form that has a lower amount of hit dice than your levels, the grapple score in the creature's entry might be off by a significant amount, so make sure that you do the math correctly when preparing your character.

Grappling is a good choice if you want to disable, do damage at a steady rate each round or just keep an opponent away from your party. There comes a time however that you need to deal a lot of damage in a small time frame; this is where the chargers specialize in - they always have the pounce special attack, which enables them to make a full attack at the end of their charge. They often have the rake ability, too, a pseudoattack which succeeds automatically if their other attacks are successful. After you finish your charge make sure that you have some plan - you can move away with your move action and cast a spell, while setting up a charge maneuver again. On the other hand, if you feel that your opponent is weak enough, you could even start a grapple - many chargers have the improved grab ability, but their grapple checks are often inferior to the true grapple forms.

Finally, the third ability that is commonly found in wild shape forms is the trample ability and is probably the simplest of the three: you just take a full-round action where you move double your speed over your enemies and damage them if they are at least one category smaller than you. It's effective when you face large crowds of enemies because it has built-in mobility and damage based on the form's strength score - it's a lot like enhanced spring attack for huge animals. It's a good idea to have some sort of defensive spells up when you change into a trampler form, because you do provoke attacks of opportunity from the enemies that you trample, even though they do get a -4 penalty to their attacks against you - some temporary hit points or an armor class buff wouldn't hurt.

Wild shape has some important errata, as in the player's handbook it is mentioned that the ability is based on the polymorph spell, however in the errata the base changes to the alternate form ability. Do note that there are errata for the alternate form ability, too, which makes things even more complex than they should be. Alternate form, with errata applied should read:

Alternate Form (Su): A creature with this special quality has the ability to assume one or more specific alternate forms. A true seeing spell or ability reveals the creature’s natural form. A creature using alternate form reverts to its natural form when killed, but separated body parts retain their shape. A creature cannot use alternate form to take the form of a creature with a template.Assuming an alternate form results in the following changes to the creature:

—The creature retains the type and subtype of its original form. It gains the size of its new form. If the new form has the aquatic subtype, the creature gains that subtype as well.

—The creature loses the natural weapons, natural armor, and movement modes of its original form, as well as any extraordinary special attacks of its original form not derived from class levels (such as the barbarian’s rage class feature).

—The creature gains the natural weapons, natural armor, movement modes, and extraordinary special attacks of its new form.

—The creature retains the special qualities of its original form. It does not gain any special qualities of its new form.

—The creature retains the spell-like abilities and supernatural attacks of its old form (except for breath weapons and gaze attacks). It does not gain the spell-like abilities or supernatural attacks of its new form.

—The creature gains the physical ability scores (Str, Dex, Con) of its new form. It retains the mental ability scores (Int, Wis, Cha) of its original form. Apply any changed physical ability score modifiers in all appropriate areas with one exception: the creature retains the hit points of its original form despite any change to its Constitution.

— Except as described elsewhere, the creature retains all other game statistics of its original form, including (but not necessarily limited to) HD, hit points, skill ranks, feats, base attack bonus, and base save bonuses.

—The creature retains any spellcasting ability it had in its original form, although it must be able to speak intelligibly to cast spells with verbal components and it must have humanlike hands to cast spells with somatic components.

—The creature is effectively camouflaged as a creature of its new form, and it gains a +10 bonus on Disguise checks if it uses this ability to create a disguise.

Any gear worn or carried by the creature that can’t be worn or carried in its new form instead falls to the ground in its space. If the creature changes size, any gear it wears or carries that can be worn or carried in its new form changes size to match the new size. (Nonhumanoid-shaped creatures can’t wear armor designed for humanoid-shaped creatures, and vice-versa.) Gear returns to normal size if dropped.

Based on this, when selecting races for the druid class it's a good idea to minimize the abilities that you are losing when you are wild shaping. Physical stat bonuses, with the exception of constitution are discouraged; on the other hand, penalties to strength and dexterity are welcome, because they will disappear once you change your shape to something else. Natural weapons, natural armor and alternative movement modes like having a climb, flying or swim speed are features that you are not going to keep while wild shaping, so avoid races with these. Finally, your type and subtypes do not change, so racial qualities that come from your type are going to stay, making certain races, like the warforged, really powerful.
