Starting with the absolute basics of the class, it's transparent that the druid has a very good head start. Even with a glance at the table of the class in the Player's Handbook one can see that the first dead level comes very late (at level 17) and it's not really a dead level if you count that it's the one where the druid unlocks 9th level spells, which I consider to be a huge power bump for any class.
After a certain level, druids are playable and effective regardless of your ability scores. This is because you can take care of your physical stats using wild shape and concentrate the best ability scores on your mental stats. Even if your rolls are so bad that you can't get a score higher than 13 to your wisdom score, they are still playable - you can rely solely on buffs and summon nature's ally spells and be effective; there even exist some debuffing spells that are good at what they do and don't require a save. If your rolls are not so bad or your dungeon master is using the point buy or the elite array method for character generation, then you are going to put everything you can in wisdom and then make sure that your constitution has a respectful score, something around 12-14; this is because after the wild shape errata, your hit points are calculated using your own constitution score, however your constitution bonus changes according to the constitution modifier of your new form, so if you have a score that gives you a positive modifier of +1 or +2 not only you gain some good amount of hit points, but it is almost guaranteed that your fortitude bonus is going to improve or stay at the same level when you wild shape. Intelligence and charisma have the same priority, depending on what you want to do - intelligence will give you some skill points and skill bonuses, while charisma helps diplomacy, handle animal and wild empathy. Strength and dexterity are a bit weird, because they depend on whether you're just starting out at level 1 and you don't have access to the wild shape ability as a consequence, or you are starting at level 5 or higher; in the first case, you can't really dump them, because you will have a really bad time in battle for the first four levels.
The base attack bonus is the second best available. Iterative attacks aren't the most important detail in a druid build, but the improvement of natural attacks and grapple checks is always welcome. Additionally, a druid that focuses on spellcasting that's not going to affect opponents in an indirect way (e.g. when summoning creatures, you don't care about your base attack bonus), for instance when casting ranged touch attack spells, the additional bonus over what the wizard and the sorcerer classes get is more than welcome.
The druid class offers two good out of three saves and they are the ones that you would generally prioritize anyway: fortitude and will. Ideally, a player would prefer a character that would make just about any save, and while reflex can do some pretty bad things to you, it doesn't compare to the outright nasty ones that can be imposed by fortitude or will saves.
The weapon selection that is available to druids isn't extremely versatile, but it gets the job done; scimitar is martial and has a good threat range, while a quarterstaff is a double weapon that you can use in conjunction with the rather famous low level druid spell, Shillelagh. The fact that you are also proficient with the natural attacks of the forms that you assume is a nice note, because it's good for resolving arguments that might occur due to obscure rulings such as this.
On the other hand, the armor proficiency that the class offers is probably the biggest in-game restriction that you will face as a druid player; it's more of an annoying rule rather than something that seriously hinders your build, however the repercussions of using prohibited armor is not to be taken lightly, as it will cost you two of the signature abilities of the class: wild shape and spellcasting. The alternative material options are so many, anyway, that you can wear the armor that you want, without a problem; these options are regularly a bit more pricey, but they will get the job done. Finally note that the restriction on the armor doesn't extent to weapons, which is a general misconception; you can use any weapons that you want, but you generally don't want to, due to nonproficiency. It's worth noting that druids in the Faerun campaign setting can choose to worship Mielikki, a Neutral Good deity that has looser restrictions on armor - druids of Mielikki are able to use any of the standard weapons or armor that rangers normally use (all simple and martial weapons, all light and medium armor and all shields) without violating their oaths; as I already said, you can already use all weapons, it's just that you don't have the proficiency, so it's unclear whether this ruling from Faerun Campaign Setting gives the druids of Mielikki the armor and weapon proficiency of druids or just the ability to use the ranger armors without violating their druidic oaths.
I dislike the alignment system, because I find it hard to believe that a character can fit within two axes of law-chaos and good-evil; it's like you're pushing those antihero characters that I love playing to make a choice and that the game punishes multidimensional backgrounds. However, since the target of this guide is purely the systematic aspect of the game and not to criticize the ethical system that it uses, from a character optimization standpoint the best alignment choice is the neutral or true neutral alignment. This is because you can't cast spells with alignment descriptors that oppose your own alignment, so by getting a true neutral alignment you won't narrow down your spell selection. As with the cleric class, this rule applies to the alignment of your deity as well; you can't expect a good deity to provide spells with the [evil] descriptor, so it's important to choose a true neutral god as your patron. At this point I would also like to make a personal (non-character optimization) comment about all those players that choose to play divine classes, but refuse to choose a patron god, probably due to personal beliefs - please don't do this; worshipping an ideal such as 'nature' is very cool, but it doesn't offer your dungeon master any character hooks that might spice up the game - if you are a worshipper of Elhonna and the story is about an Elhonnian cult your character will be a lot more involved that if you just received your powers from 'nature'.
Ever wanted to be part of a cult that wields divine power over vast expanses and have an ultra secret language that you can use with the rest of the members? Well, by getting a level in the druid class you can make your wish come true, as druids automatically learn Druidic, a free language that you receive upon becoming a 1st level druid. This means that all druids are able to communicate in that language and it is even forbidden to teach this language to a non-druid.
Before my character optimization days I always thought that the druid wasn't a particularly skillful class; perhaps because it felt that its focus was a lot more narrow compared to the rest of the Player's Handbook classes, which are more generic at a variable degree compared to the druid. It was a pleasant surprise to find out that not only the druid has a respectable class skill list, but the skills per level are actually quite high as well, at 4+Int modifier. Druids also get wild empathy, a special ability that resembles the diplomacy skill, but can only be used on animals and some magical beasts.
The woodland stride ability on first glance seems to be just a special ability that enhances the theme of the class; it enables the druid to move through natural undergrowth at his normal speed and without taking damage or suffering any other form of imparement. However, this ability can be used at low levels in conjunction with certain spells in order to create situations where your opponents suffer a serious hindrance to their mobility, while you can move freely due to this ability. Examples of spells that can be used in such a way are Briar Web (Spell Compendium) and Plant Growth (Player's Handbook).
Later in his career the druid has access to venom immunity, an ability which not only is useful as a defense against poisons, but also as a form of offense: using poisons generally requires the use poison class ability, because otherwise you risk poisoning yourself, but this isn't readily available to the druid class; however having immunity to all poisons makes a druid sure that even if they poison themselves when coating their weapons in poison, they will suffer no ill effect due to the poison's effects. Unfortunately, poisons are really effective in early levels, around 1 to 6 and after that they begin losing their effectiveness; when you take into consideration that most of the times that you will be in melee battle with an opponent, you're going to be polymorphed into an animal, then it's understandable that the application of poison isn't going to be your signature combat maneuver, however you do have the option should the opportunity arises.
Finally druids get unlimited uses of disguise self through the A Thousand Faces class feature. In the original text it mentions the alter self spell, which would be a more powerful option, even though perhaps a little late to be used in battle, but the errata not only changed the spell, but also the scope of the spell as well, as it can't be used on the druid's possessions - only minor physical alterations of the druid's appearance within the limits described by the spell can be performed. Essentially, since the alterations are not an illusory, but a real a effect, this is probably the class feature that inspired the designers to create the Changeling race from Eberron (which also appears in Monster Manual III).
A significant problem in druid builds is laying out feats appropriately. Unfortunately for druids, there are many feats that are intuitive choices and the class doesn't offer any bonus ones, so most builds are feat starved or they feel like you have to wait until you attain a certain level in order for them to come online. I often jokingly say that the druid class has an exception to the feat rule - they don't get a feat at level 6; instead, they get a class feature - Natural Spell. This feat is so good if you are planning on using the Wild Shape feature that your level 6 feat slot is almost always reserved for it. Having said that, choosing human as your race, isn't only the most optimal choice, but many times it is also an absolute necessity; for example, imagine the following scenario: you want to select a race that doesn't provide you with a bonus feat, but you want to select two staple druid feats: Augment Summoning and Natural Spell. These two feats require three feat slots if you take into account the Spell Focus (Conjuration) requirement of Augment Summoning, so there is no room for other choices until level 6; if you choose to select something else, then you're potentially moving Augment Summoning to level 9, which is really late - at that level there are other more powerful options that you could take. If flaws are allowed by your dungeon master, a variable rule that you can find in the unearthed arcana book, then it's a good idea to take as many as you are allowed.
