One of the top initiate feats that are available to the druid class, gatekeeper initiate gives you knowledge(the planes) as a class skill, an ability that mimics resist nature's lure, but is targeted at aberrations and enhances your repertoire with a large array of useful spells. Protection from evil is a spell that can be used defensively, but, despite what the name suggests, it's not useful only against evil opponents. Except from providing combat bonuses against evil creatures, it also blocks and suppresses any mind control attempts against the recipient of the spell; this is a very handy way to block enemy spellcasters from dominating your summons, or, worse, your animal companion. Additionally, protection from evil can be used as a countermeasure against your own tactics – summoning spells. You see, summoned monsters (well, this doesn't apply to creatures that are of good alignment) are not able to attack a target that has an active protection of evil spell, because the spell creates a protective barrier that blocks their natural attacks from working against warded creatures; if you find yourself overrun by enemy summoners, then you can employ this low-level buff to save yourself. Zone of natural purity is really basic – it provides a +1 sacred bonus to attack, damage and saves of all fey and plant creature in a small emanation and aberrations get a similar penalty: -1 to attacks, damage and saves. The buff lasts 2 hours per level, however the effect isn't centered on you; you can probably use it before engaging in battle if you set up correctly though. It's great that you get dimensional anchor at a discount – it's a level 4 spell for sorcerers, wizards and clerics. Dimensional anchor is a ray that blocks a creature's extradimensional forms of movement. It's obvious that this is useful to any party, however, if you like to grapple targets, by using wild shape or having your animal companion or summons to do it, then teleportation spells such as dimension door are a very easy way for spellcasters to break the grapple. Using dimensional anchor beforehand enhances your grapple maneuvers. Since it is a ray, the spell doesn't have a saving throw, but spell resistance applies. Nature's wrath is a blast that targets specific types of creatures – it's most effective against aberrations, but it can also harm dragons, giants, humanoids magical beasts, monstrous humanoids and outsiders with no elemental subtypes. Aberrations don't only receive damage, but they also have to make a will save against a dazing effect, otherwise they are dazed for a single round. This spell isn't the best blast available, but it is useful against aberrations and it has anti-friendly fire measures built-in, since it will not harm animals and elementals – your summons and animal companion most usual types. Another spell that you receive earlier than the wizard and the cleric class is banishment – in the player's handbook is a 6th level spell for clerics and 7th for sorcereres and wizards. Banishment is an effective tool against extraplanar creatures that druids normally don't have access to. Dimensional lock can be used in the same way as dimensional anchor, however it is a 20ft emanation from a point in space and it lasts for quite a while – days per caster level. As it's common with the spells in the gatekeeper initiate list, dimensional lock is normally an 8th level spell for sorcerers, wizards and clerics, while you get it as a 6th level spell. Return to nature is a spell similar to nature's wrath, it gives penalties to creatures depending on their creature type, but it's much better. If a humanoid is an arcane spellcaster then return to nature gives it negative levels, a really effective tactic against spellcasters. Dragons, magical beasts and outsiders with no elemental subtypes lose the use of some of their supernatural or spell-like abilities. Aberrations lose all of their supernatural and spell-like abilities. Mind blank can be casted on you or your companion and take care of all of the problems that you will have against mind-affecting spells and abilities. The spell has a standard duration of 24 hours, too.
