The druid handbook

The druid is a thematically wonderful class from the 3.5e Player's Handbook. As with most of the spellcaster classes from that book, the Druid is considered to be one of the most powerful classes in the game and has the potential to excel in almost every aspect or party role - he is able to have raw damage output, be the party face and has enormous utility through his spells and forms outside of combat.
In the 3.5e of D&D, playing one of the spellcasting classes from the Player's Handbook can be a daunting task, as the seer number of the available options can discourage players from planning a character build that they are satisfied with. The target of this guide is to assist players with practical optimization; that is, help them build a druid that is going to be actually played as a member of a party. This means that you won't find theoretical optimization or 'broken' builds in here, or builds that rely heavily on RAW vs RAI arguments to work.
If you try to analyze the base classes in the Player's Handbook, you will see that a fair amount of them share a common design or rather they have been approached by the designers in the same way. This design pattern that the base classes share is what I call the axis approach; the axis approach works like this: work on a few class features that their characteristic is that they span across all or most of the 20 levels of a class; as you acquire more levels, these features become stronger, give you more options or both at the same time. Based on that fact, you can clearly see that the paladin's axises are 'mount', 'lay on hands', 'smite' or that the rogue class has 'sneak attack', 'trap sense' and 'special abilities' or that the barbarian is all about 'rage', 'damage reduction' and 'trap sense'. An important note is that these 'axes' rarely intersect by themselves, without the outside influence of a feat or a class feature of a prestige class.
If we try to analyze the druid class using the axis approach, we will identify three main categories: the Beast (wild shape), the Summoner (spellcasting) and the Master (animal companion). These are three aspects that coexist in any druid build at the same time and they are telling how a druid build is going to accomplish all those things that he is capable of, as it's through these aspects that he is going to unlock his potential. It's important to have this information breakdown as a player, in order to know what to expect when you are playing the class; the druid is capable of destroying opponents through the power of nature or through transforming themselves in terrifying creatures, but don't play this class if you want to swing huge swords, because it will let you down.
This guide is dedicated to druid builds that do not focus solely on one of the three aspects, but they progress all three aspects at the same time.
Another warning about being let down by the druid class - avoid playing a druid build if you don't like bookeeping; this is because the amount of upkeep the druid class requires is probably among the highest - you need to keep track of your sheet, your companion, your stat changes with every wild shape form, the improved stats of summoned creatures because of your class abilities (e.g. Augment Summoning) and you shouldn't forget that druids are actually full casters that need to memorize spells - vancian spellcasting alone is complicated enough for many players; and this is something that you need to revise every time that you gain a level. If you decide to play a druid, please make sure that you can keep up with multiple sheets for a single character and that you have the modified stats of the creatures that you most like to summon readily available; if you try to generate the stats on-the-fly you will be losing a lot of time going through manuals and you will end up irritating your DM and your friends if you keep doing it all the time. Of course, sooner or later you will have to do this, because you can't be prepared for every situation, but make sure that you have generated the stats of your favorite wild shape forms and your favorite summons to minimize the chances.
If you get past all that preparation that the class needs, it's very rewarding to play it, especially if you like versatile characters. The beauty of the druid is its ability to adapt to the needs of the current situation, mainly because of the tools in his arsenal - summon nature's ally and wild shape can be used in completely different ways without any downtime or preparation.
An important piece of information is that multiclassing as a druid is rarely beneficial, at least if you want all of your aspects to be progressed equally. This is true because there are no prestige classes (or at least, they are very rare) out there that progress your companion, your spellcasting and your wild shape abilities at the same time, except from additional druid levels of course. This is something that all classes that use the axis design pattern heavily share, e.g. you can't multiclass as a paladin and keep your spellcasting, your special mount and your lay on hands at an equal level; if you want to specialize in a specific aspect, you need to pay the price of specialization by sacrificing the power of the rest of your aspects. The bottom line is that if you are unsure about how to plan your build, at least when you select your classes, the safest (and many times, the most optimal) option is to just go with 20 levels in the druid class; I know that this is a very unintuitive piece of advice, especially in the multiclassing madness that D&D 3.5e is, but in my experience, elegant and simple druid builds that do not reserve assets for prestige class requirements are the superior ones.

The Chassis

Starting with the absolute basics of the class, it's transparent that the druid has a very good head start. Even with a glance at the table of the class in the Player's Handbook one can see that the first dead level comes very late (at level 17) and it's not really a dead level if you count that it's the one where the druid unlocks 9th level spells, which I consider to be a huge power bump for any class.
After a certain level, druids are playable and effective regardless of your ability scores. This is because you can take care of your physical stats using wild shape and concentrate the best ability scores on your mental stats. Even if your rolls are so bad that you can't get a score higher than 13 to your wisdom score, they are still playable - you can rely solely on buffs and summon nature's ally spells and be effective; there even exist some debuffing spells that are good at what they do and don't require a save. If your rolls are not so bad or your dungeon master is using the point buy or the elite array method for character generation, then you are going to put everything you can in wisdom and then make sure that your constitution has a respectful score, something around 12-14; this is because after the wild shape errata, your hit points are calculated using your own constitution score, however your constitution bonus changes according to the constitution modifier of your new form, so if you have a score that gives you a positive modifier of +1 or +2 not only you gain some good amount of hit points, but it is almost guaranteed that your fortitude bonus is going to improve or stay at the same level when you wild shape. Intelligence and charisma have the same priority, depending on what you want to do - intelligence will give you some skill points and skill bonuses, while charisma helps diplomacy, handle animal and wild empathy. Strength and dexterity are a bit weird, because they depend on whether you're just starting out at level 1 and you don't have access to the wild shape ability as a consequence, or you are starting at level 5 or higher; in the first case, you can't really dump them, because you will have a really bad time in battle for the first four levels.
The base attack bonus is the second best available. Iterative attacks aren't the most important detail in a druid build, but the improvement of natural attacks and grapple checks is always welcome. Additionally, a druid that focuses on spellcasting that's not going to affect opponents in an indirect way (e.g. when summoning creatures, you don't care about your base attack bonus), for instance when casting ranged touch attack spells, the additional bonus over what the wizard and the sorcerer classes get is more than welcome.
The druid class offers two good out of three saves and they are the ones that you would generally prioritize anyway: fortitude and will. Ideally, a player would prefer a character that would make just about any save, and while reflex can do some pretty bad things to you, it doesn't compare to the outright nasty ones that can be imposed by fortitude or will saves.
The weapon selection that is available to druids isn't extremely versatile, but it gets the job done; scimitar is martial and has a good threat range, while a quarterstaff is a double weapon that you can use in conjunction with the rather famous low level druid spell, Shillelagh. The fact that you are also proficient with the natural attacks of the forms that you assume is a nice note, because it's good for resolving arguments that might occur due to obscure rulings such as this.
On the other hand, the armor proficiency that the class offers is probably the biggest in-game restriction that you will face as a druid player; it's more of an annoying rule rather than something that seriously hinders your build, however the repercussions of using prohibited armor is not to be taken lightly, as it will cost you two of the signature abilities of the class: wild shape and spellcasting. The alternative material options are so many, anyway, that you can wear the armor that you want, without a problem; these options are regularly a bit more pricey, but they will get the job done. Finally note that the restriction on the armor doesn't extent to weapons, which is a general misconception; you can use any weapons that you want, but you generally don't want to, due to nonproficiency. It's worth noting that druids in the Faerun campaign setting can choose to worship Mielikki, a Neutral Good deity that has looser restrictions on armor - druids of Mielikki are able to use any of the standard weapons or armor that rangers normally use (all simple and martial weapons, all light and medium armor and all shields) without violating their oaths; as I already said, you can already use all weapons, it's just that you don't have the proficiency, so it's unclear whether this ruling from Faerun Campaign Setting gives the druids of Mielikki the armor and weapon proficiency of druids or just the ability to use the ranger armors without violating their druidic oaths.
I dislike the alignment system, because I find it hard to believe that a character can fit within two axes of law-chaos and good-evil; it's like you're pushing those antihero characters that I love playing to make a choice and that the game punishes multidimensional backgrounds. However, since the target of this guide is purely the systematic aspect of the game and not to criticize the ethical system that it uses, from a character optimization standpoint the best alignment choice is the neutral or true neutral alignment. This is because you can't cast spells with alignment descriptors that oppose your own alignment, so by getting a true neutral alignment you won't narrow down your spell selection. As with the cleric class, this rule applies to the alignment of your deity as well; you can't expect a good deity to provide spells with the [evil] descriptor, so it's important to choose a true neutral god as your patron. At this point I would also like to make a personal (non-character optimization) comment about all those players that choose to play divine classes, but refuse to choose a patron god, probably due to personal beliefs - please don't do this; worshipping an ideal such as 'nature' is very cool, but it doesn't offer your dungeon master any character hooks that might spice up the game - if you are a worshipper of Elhonna and the story is about an Elhonnian cult your character will be a lot more involved that if you just received your powers from 'nature'.
Ever wanted to be part of a cult that wields divine power over vast expanses and have an ultra secret language that you can use with the rest of the members? Well, by getting a level in the druid class you can make your wish come true, as druids automatically learn Druidic, a free language that you receive upon becoming a 1st level druid. This means that all druids are able to communicate in that language and it is even forbidden to teach this language to a non-druid.
Before my character optimization days I always thought that the druid wasn't a particularly skillful class; perhaps because it felt that its focus was a lot more narrow compared to the rest of the Player's Handbook classes, which are more generic at a variable degree compared to the druid. It was a pleasant surprise to find out that not only the druid has a respectable class skill list, but the skills per level are actually quite high as well, at 4+Int modifier. Druids also get wild empathy, a special ability that resembles the diplomacy skill, but can only be used on animals and some magical beasts.
The woodland stride ability on first glance seems to be just a special ability that enhances the theme of the class; it enables the druid to move through natural undergrowth at his normal speed and without taking damage or suffering any other form of imparement. However, this ability can be used at low levels in conjunction with certain spells in order to create situations where your opponents suffer a serious hindrance to their mobility, while you can move freely due to this ability. Examples of spells that can be used in such a way are Briar Web (Spell Compendium) and Plant Growth (Player's Handbook).
Later in his career the druid has access to venom immunity, an ability which not only is useful as a defense against poisons, but also as a form of offense: using poisons generally requires the use poison class ability, because otherwise you risk poisoning yourself, but this isn't readily available to the druid class; however having immunity to all poisons makes a druid sure that even if they poison themselves when coating their weapons in poison, they will suffer no ill effect due to the poison's effects. Unfortunately, poisons are really effective in early levels, around 1 to 6 and after that they begin losing their effectiveness; when you take into consideration that most of the times that you will be in melee battle with an opponent, you're going to be polymorphed into an animal, then it's understandable that the application of poison isn't going to be your signature combat maneuver, however you do have the option should the opportunity arises.
Finally druids get unlimited uses of disguise self through the A Thousand Faces class feature. In the original text it mentions the alter self spell, which would be a more powerful option, even though perhaps a little late to be used in battle, but the errata not only changed the spell, but also the scope of the spell as well, as it can't be used on the druid's possessions - only minor physical alterations of the druid's appearance within the limits described by the spell can be performed. Essentially, since the alterations are not an illusory, but a real a effect, this is probably the class feature that inspired the designers to create the Changeling race from Eberron (which also appears in Monster Manual III).
A significant problem in druid builds is laying out feats appropriately. Unfortunately for druids, there are many feats that are intuitive choices and the class doesn't offer any bonus ones, so most builds are feat starved or they feel like you have to wait until you attain a certain level in order for them to come online. I often jokingly say that the druid class has an exception to the feat rule - they don't get a feat at level 6; instead, they get a class feature - Natural Spell. This feat is so good if you are planning on using the Wild Shape feature that your level 6 feat slot is almost always reserved for it. Having said that, choosing human as your race, isn't only the most optimal choice, but many times it is also an absolute necessity; for example, imagine the following scenario: you want to select a race that doesn't provide you with a bonus feat, but you want to select two staple druid feats: Augment Summoning and Natural Spell. These two feats require three feat slots if you take into account the Spell Focus (Conjuration) requirement of Augment Summoning, so there is no room for other choices until level 6; if you choose to select something else, then you're potentially moving Augment Summoning to level 9, which is really late - at that level there are other more powerful options that you could take. If flaws are allowed by your dungeon master, a variable rule that you can find in the unearthed arcana book, then it's a good idea to take as many as you are allowed.

The Beast

The druid is a competent spellcaster, but wild shape is his signature ability, it's what makes the class feel different compared to a nature-focused cleric. I have previously argued that there aren't many multiclass or prestige class options for the druid and that going 20 levels deep into the class is completely fine; what breaks this generic feel to the class are the wild shape choises that he will make, as they will greatly influence your spell and feat selections.
There are two main categories of wild shape forms: defensive and battle. The defensive forms are used by druids who treat wild shape as a strong defensive buff with a long duration - high natural armor, dexterity scores and alternative movement modes, especially fly, are very valuable to a spellcaster. Battle forms are used by druids who want to take a more direct approach and get into melee battle; these forms usually have strong extraordinary special attacks, like improved grab, pounce or trample and high physical scores. There is a third category of wild shape forms, but it is rarely used in battle - it's the one that you will use when you want to blend in and be inconspicuous - the utility forms, where you trade off the power of your wild shape in raw stats for subtlety.
The battle forms are very dangerous and a druid that is using them can contribute in a fight considerably, using just the special attacks that he has acquired by wild shaping into them. However, since these forms are usually not able to use conventional weapons, a druid player needs to get into a different mindset in order to play them efficiently and familiarize himself with the most common extraordinary special abilities: pounce, grapple and trample. It's also important to note that the distinction between these isn't always clear - it's possible for a form to be good at any combination like charge and trample or pounce and grapple or grapple alone.
A form that is able to grapple will almost always have access to the improved grab extraordinary special ability. Other common traits of the grappler forms are size of large or larger, a good strength score and sometimes, the constrict pr the shallow whole ability. Improved grab gives you the ability to start a grapple as a free action if you hit with a melee attack; additionally, by taking a large penalty to your grapple check you can even start a grapple without yourself being considered as grappled. Grappling is very effective against spellcasters; a spellcaster that is not prepared against the grapple maneuver will face problems against effective grapple forms. Be warned that a single teleportation spell, which often have just verbal components, is enough for a spellcaster to escape your grapple, so don't just go around grappling anyone who casts a spell! Finally, the swallow whole ability is handy, but most of the times the amount of damage required in order for the creature to exit is around 25, which is low, even though an opponent can only use a light piercing or slashing weapon to deal this damage, as he is considered grappled. This means that you need to be careful when swallowing opponents - at least try to make sure that they don't have abilities that enable them to do concentrated damage like sneak attack, power attack, etc. Last note about grappling - the grapple check includes the base attack bonus; since it's possible to assume a form that has a lower amount of hit dice than your levels, the grapple score in the creature's entry might be off by a significant amount, so make sure that you do the math correctly when preparing your character.
Grappling is a good choice if you want to disable, do damage at a steady rate each round or just keep an opponent away from your party. There comes a time however that you need to deal a lot of damage in a small time frame; this is where the chargers specialize in - they always have the pounce special attack, which enables them to make a full attack at the end of their charge. They often have the rake ability, too, a pseudoattack which succeeds automatically if their other attacks are successful. After you finish your charge make sure that you have some plan - you can move away with your move action and cast a spell, while setting up a charge maneuver again. On the other hand, if you feel that your opponent is weak enough, you could even start a grapple - many chargers have the improved grab ability, but their grapple checks are often inferior to the true grapple forms.
Finally, the third ability that is commonly found in wild shape forms is the trample ability and is probably the simplest of the three: you just take a full-round action where you move double your speed over your enemies and damage them if they are at least one category smaller than you. It's effective when you face large crowds of enemies because it has built-in mobility and damage based on the form's strength score - it's a lot like enhanced spring attack for huge animals. It's a good idea to have some sort of defensive spells up when you change into a trampler form, because you do provoke attacks of opportunity from the enemies that you trample, even though they do get a -4 penalty to their attacks against you - some temporary hit points or an armor class buff wouldn't hurt.
Wild shape has some important errata, as in the player's handbook it is mentioned that the ability is based on the polymorph spell, however in the errata the base changes to the alternate form ability. Do note that there are errata for the alternate form ability, too, which makes things even more complex than they should be. Alternate form, with errata applied should read:

Alternate Form (Su): A creature with this special quality has the ability to assume one or more specific alternate forms. A true seeing spell or ability reveals the creature’s natural form. A creature using alternate form reverts to its natural form when killed, but separated body parts retain their shape. A creature cannot use alternate form to take the form of a creature with a template.Assuming an alternate form results in the following changes to the creature:
—The creature retains the type and subtype of its original form. It gains the size of its new form. If the new form has the aquatic subtype, the creature gains that subtype as well.
—The creature loses the natural weapons, natural armor, and movement modes of its original form, as well as any extraordinary special attacks of its original form not derived from class levels (such as the barbarian’s rage class feature).
—The creature gains the natural weapons, natural armor, movement modes, and extraordinary special attacks of its new form.
—The creature retains the special qualities of its original form. It does not gain any special qualities of its new form.
—The creature retains the spell-like abilities and supernatural attacks of its old form (except for breath weapons and gaze attacks). It does not gain the spell-like abilities or supernatural attacks of its new form.
—The creature gains the physical ability scores (Str, Dex, Con) of its new form. It retains the mental ability scores (Int, Wis, Cha) of its original form. Apply any changed physical ability score modifiers in all appropriate areas with one exception: the creature retains the hit points of its original form despite any change to its Constitution.
— Except as described elsewhere, the creature retains all other game statistics of its original form, including (but not necessarily limited to) HD, hit points, skill ranks, feats, base attack bonus, and base save bonuses.
—The creature retains any spellcasting ability it had in its original form, although it must be able to speak intelligibly to cast spells with verbal components and it must have humanlike hands to cast spells with somatic components.
—The creature is effectively camouflaged as a creature of its new form, and it gains a +10 bonus on Disguise checks if it uses this ability to create a disguise.

Any gear worn or carried by the creature that can’t be worn or carried in its new form instead falls to the ground in its space. If the creature changes size, any gear it wears or carries that can be worn or carried in its new form changes size to match the new size. (Nonhumanoid-shaped creatures can’t wear armor designed for humanoid-shaped creatures, and vice-versa.) Gear returns to normal size if dropped.
Based on this, when selecting races for the druid class it's a good idea to minimize the abilities that you are losing when you are wild shaping. Physical stat bonuses, with the exception of constitution are discouraged; on the other hand, penalties to strength and dexterity are welcome, because they will disappear once you change your shape to something else. Natural weapons, natural armor and alternative movement modes like having a climb, flying or swim speed are features that you are not going to keep while wild shaping, so avoid races with these. Finally, your type and subtypes do not change, so racial qualities that come from your type are going to stay, making certain races, like the warforged, really powerful.

The summoner

The main problem of the summoner archetype is the fact that the summon nature's ally line of spells have a casting time of 1 round. It's clearly mentioned in the player's handbook, under 'Casting a Spell' on page 143: 'A spell that takes 1 round to cast is a full-round action. It comes into effect just before the beginning of your turn in the round after you began casting the spell. You then act normally after the spell is completed.', so, assuming that you are already wild shaped into a form, in the first round of combat most of the times you will state that you start casting a summon nature's ally spell and finish your turn. It's important to remember that you don't have to make any decisions at that point - all spell variables are selected when you finish casting the spell, which will take place just before you start your next turn.
However, it's easy for opponents to disrupt your casting during that time, as they will all act before you finish casting the spell. This means that you need to take some protective measures in order to avoid disruptions. The easiest (and the one that requires the least resources) would be to max out your concentration skill, but this is something that doesn't exactly deal with the problem - it's probably your last line of defense, because if you fail the roll, the spell fizzles. Another good investment would be to select one of the defensive aerial forms as your wild shape form of choice; there are many good options that will boost your armor class and since they're flying they will keep you away from the dangers of melee combat; the dragon wild shape feat is particularly good at this - many dragons have great natural armor, average dexterity scores (around 13-15 at medium size) and some tasty supernatural abilities (e.g. a shadow dragon's shadow blend that gives you cover).
Last, but not least, there is a method that treats the problem by bypassing it altogether. That is to somehow reduce the casting time of your summon spells from 1 full round to less than that. There is a method of doing this even in core, but it is very expensive and reserved for the higher levels - quicken spell, but it will get the job done. Outside of core there are some options, but they usually come with certain limitations; for instance, available through the shifter substitution levels is the beast spirit, which replaces the animal companion but gives you certain benefits according to your level - at level 12 you get the rapid summons ability, which makes you able to cast any summon nature's ally spell as a standard action. Another one is the chronocharm of the uncaring archmage from magic item compendium; it is cheap trinket that functions once per day and lets you reduce the casting time of a spell from a full-round action to a standard action. Finally, there is the option of the rapid spell metamagic feat, which everyone can use.
Druids are able to cast the summon nature's ally line of spells spontaneously, so it's not so bright to prepare them - instead you could prepare a utility spell in its place and if it's not needed during the day, you can just transmute its energy spontaneously into a summon nature's ally spell. Many alternative class features alter or replace your ability to cast summon nature's ally spontaneously; unless you really know what you are doing - maybe you need it to qualify for a prestige or feat, or your build is planned around this alternative feature, this is almost universally a bad choice, because it is going to cost you a big chunk of your utility.
However, there is an exception to not preparing the summon nature's ally spells - it's when you need to apply metamagic feats to them; then you're left with no choice but to prepare the metamagic version of the summon when you are memorizing spells. I'd like to note that in the player's handbook under 'Cast a Spell' at page 143, it describes how clerics must take more time to spontaneously cast a metamagic version of a cure or inflict spell, but there is no mention of druids casting spontaneously using metamagic feats. One could argue that a druid would be able to use this rule just as clerics can, but it wouldn't do much good - the summon nature's ally spells already take a round to cast, so enhancing it with a metamagic feat would take its casting time to 1 round + 1 full-round action, which is a lot of time to be casting in battle. However, if you have found a way to reduce the casting times of your summon spells as described in the previous paragraph, for instance, using the shifter substitution levels, then you would be able to cast metamagic'ed summon nature's ally spells as full-round actions; note that full-round actions take place in the same round that you start casting and they differ from 1 round casting time which take place just before the beginning of your next round.
A very good investment for the spellcaster druid are the metamagic rods. There are many reasons for this; you receive free metamagic in a class that is very tight on feats and moreover, there are no options to reduce the level adjustment on spells, like arcane classes can using arcane thesis and similar effects. Additionally, the druid spell list has a large amount of long lasting buffs and by picking a couple of cheap metamagic rods of extend spell you can make them last a full or even two days in some cases. Finally, they don't reserve a body slot - you just have to hold them, so if the form that you have wild shaped into has some sort of hands, then you can use them without a hassle.

The Master

I often claim that when playing a druid you are actually playing two, not one character and this is partialy true, because of this class feature. If you keep the animal companion that you start with (or have one without an adjustment to your druid level to acquire it), then it will have around 13-14 animal hit dice, for which it gains feats and skills. Besides that, its natural armor, strength and dexterity are improved and it gains various special abilities.
The animal companion's usefulness depends a lot on your level; for instance, a level 1 druid can acquire a riding dog that is trained for war with barding armor, which deals respectable damage, has an attack that trips people and can even track - this whole package is often a lot better than what first level characters are able to do, but unfortunately it will quickly lose its power after a few levels.
What an animal companion is able to do is similar to what the same animal would be able to do as a wild shape form; for instance, it's almost certain that you would use a dire bear as a grappler, have it pick off an enemy and start tearing him apart round by round. It's not necessary to use your animal companion in battle - you can also use it as a mount; this is a similar usage of this class feature as using wild shape to transform in a defensive form. Flying mounts are almost certainly the best, as they keep you away from danger.
Sometimes the size of an animal companion can be an issue, because you can't take it with you anywhere - imagine a huge dinosaur in a dungeon or in an acquatic campaign - it's just going to be bothering you and your party more than it will help. If this is the case, you have some available options and the easier would be to just get rid of it; there are many alternative class features that trade the animal companion for other bonuses. If you want to keep your animal companion, you could use some of your spells to reduce its size, like reduce animal or baleful polymorph. Finally, you have the option of selecting an animal companion that is of an appropriate size, like medium; there are some of them that are very effective, regardless of their smaller size. At any case, as the animal companion is one of the three defining class features of a druid, it's a good idea to talk to your dungeon master and ask him to help you out with the choice.
Regarding the templates that you can apply to your animal companion, there are a few choices. However, these matters fall into gray area, so it's important to ask you dungeon master if they are allowed. In eberron there are two templates for animals in the eberron campaign setting: horrid and magebred. Regarding horrid animals, it is implied that you can get one as an animal companion if you get an additional -3 penalty to your druid level over that of the corresponding dire animal, however this is not explicitly stated; there is a table with the levels that you can get most horrid animals, but some dire animals are missing, like the dire tortoise. The magebred template exists in the eberron campaign setting, too, but there is no mention that you can have a magebred animal companion; however, in the five nations book, there are two templated animals - a brown bear and a ghost tiger that are eligible to serve as companions. Finally, there is a template from the monster manual II book, the warbeast, that can be added to any medium-sized or larger animal. The great thing is that you can train an animal to be a warbeast, using a handle animal check; it does take time, however, the bonuses are very well worth it.
Another matter that falls under gray area is the psychic reformation trick. Psychic reformation is a power from the expanded psionics handbook that enables you to change your allocated skills and feat choices and this is a great option if your dungeon master allows you to cast it on your animal companion and choose its feats and skills. The skill list of animals is not especially interesting - you will mostly put points in listen, spot and survival. However most animals entries list feats like toughness and alertness, which are worthless and could easily be replaced by something better; this is especially true for the animals that you get at higher levels, by receiving a penalty to your effective druid level - an example would be the dire tortoise, which has 14 hit dice and its entry in sandstorm lists that it has the toughness feat three times!
Regarding skill tricks, there are not many of them that are available to animal companions, mainly because they will receive only one skill point per level (skill tricks require that you spend two skill points). This means that you can acquire them either through the psychic reformation, or through a feat.
A feature that any animal companion has is share spells; this is a very important benefit for any spellcaster and it's what makes the bond between the druid and his companion special. Sharing spells comes in two flavors: the druid is able to cast spells that he would normally be able to cast only on himself on his companion and this mode can be used even if the spell doesn't affect creatures of its type (animal most of the time); on the other hand the druid can choose a spell that affects himself to also affect his companion, but the effect is lost once the companion moves more than 5ft away from the druid. Any form would benefit from a bite of the werebear, a personal spell from spell compendium that gives you, among other benefits, a +16 enhancement bonus to your strength; casting this on your animal companion would make it unstoppable immediately and due to the spell's range you are unable to cast it to anyone other than yourself. On the other hand, the sharing of spells is akin to enhancing your spells with the twin spell metamagic feat; of course the restrictions are many more, but the ability to double your spells, especially so early in your career, since you get the ability right from the start, is going to add versatility.
Finally remember that animal companions have their own item slots - they are not that many as those that humanoids have, but they will at least be able to wear an armor. This is a very good investment and you can surely find an armor enhancement that suits your animal companion's needs - bonuses to will saves or reduced armor check penalties are very welcome, because the will saves is a department that animals are lacking, so enemies can target them there and if your companion isn't trained with armor you want its barding to have an armor check penalty of 0 - that way it won't have penalties to its attack.
