I often claim that when playing a druid you are actually playing two, not one character and this is partialy true, because of this class feature. If you keep the animal companion that you start with (or have one without an adjustment to your druid level to acquire it), then it will have around 13-14 animal hit dice, for which it gains feats and skills. Besides that, its natural armor, strength and dexterity are improved and it gains various special abilities.

The animal companion's usefulness depends a lot on your level; for instance, a level 1 druid can acquire a riding dog that is trained for war with barding armor, which deals respectable damage, has an attack that trips people and can even track - this whole package is often a lot better than what first level characters are able to do, but unfortunately it will quickly lose its power after a few levels.

What an animal companion is able to do is similar to what the same animal would be able to do as a wild shape form; for instance, it's almost certain that you would use a dire bear as a grappler, have it pick off an enemy and start tearing him apart round by round. It's not necessary to use your animal companion in battle - you can also use it as a mount; this is a similar usage of this class feature as using wild shape to transform in a defensive form. Flying mounts are almost certainly the best, as they keep you away from danger.

Sometimes the size of an animal companion can be an issue, because you can't take it with you anywhere - imagine a huge dinosaur in a dungeon or in an acquatic campaign - it's just going to be bothering you and your party more than it will help. If this is the case, you have some available options and the easier would be to just get rid of it; there are many alternative class features that trade the animal companion for other bonuses. If you want to keep your animal companion, you could use some of your spells to reduce its size, like reduce animal or baleful polymorph. Finally, you have the option of selecting an animal companion that is of an appropriate size, like medium; there are some of them that are very effective, regardless of their smaller size. At any case, as the animal companion is one of the three defining class features of a druid, it's a good idea to talk to your dungeon master and ask him to help you out with the choice.

Regarding the templates that you can apply to your animal companion, there are a few choices. However, these matters fall into gray area, so it's important to ask you dungeon master if they are allowed. In eberron there are two templates for animals in the eberron campaign setting: horrid and magebred. Regarding horrid animals, it is implied that you can get one as an animal companion if you get an additional -3 penalty to your druid level over that of the corresponding dire animal, however this is not explicitly stated; there is a table with the levels that you can get most horrid animals, but some dire animals are missing, like the dire tortoise. The magebred template exists in the eberron campaign setting, too, but there is no mention that you can have a magebred animal companion; however, in the five nations book, there are two templated animals - a brown bear and a ghost tiger that are eligible to serve as companions. Finally, there is a template from the monster manual II book, the warbeast, that can be added to any medium-sized or larger animal. The great thing is that you can train an animal to be a warbeast, using a handle animal check; it does take time, however, the bonuses are very well worth it.

Another matter that falls under gray area is the psychic reformation trick. Psychic reformation is a power from the expanded psionics handbook that enables you to change your allocated skills and feat choices and this is a great option if your dungeon master allows you to cast it on your animal companion and choose its feats and skills. The skill list of animals is not especially interesting - you will mostly put points in listen, spot and survival. However most animals entries list feats like toughness and alertness, which are worthless and could easily be replaced by something better; this is especially true for the animals that you get at higher levels, by receiving a penalty to your effective druid level - an example would be the dire tortoise, which has 14 hit dice and its entry in sandstorm lists that it has the toughness feat three times!

Regarding skill tricks, there are not many of them that are available to animal companions, mainly because they will receive only one skill point per level (skill tricks require that you spend two skill points). This means that you can acquire them either through the psychic reformation, or through a feat.

A feature that any animal companion has is share spells; this is a very important benefit for any spellcaster and it's what makes the bond between the druid and his companion special. Sharing spells comes in two flavors: the druid is able to cast spells that he would normally be able to cast only on himself on his companion and this mode can be used even if the spell doesn't affect creatures of its type (animal most of the time); on the other hand the druid can choose a spell that affects himself to also affect his companion, but the effect is lost once the companion moves more than 5ft away from the druid. Any form would benefit from a bite of the werebear, a personal spell from spell compendium that gives you, among other benefits, a +16 enhancement bonus to your strength; casting this on your animal companion would make it unstoppable immediately and due to the spell's range you are unable to cast it to anyone other than yourself. On the other hand, the sharing of spells is akin to enhancing your spells with the twin spell metamagic feat; of course the restrictions are many more, but the ability to double your spells, especially so early in your career, since you get the ability right from the start, is going to add versatility.

Finally remember that animal companions have their own item slots - they are not that many as those that humanoids have, but they will at least be able to wear an armor. This is a very good investment and you can surely find an armor enhancement that suits your animal companion's needs - bonuses to will saves or reduced armor check penalties are very welcome, because the will saves is a department that animals are lacking, so enemies can target them there and if your companion isn't trained with armor you want its barding to have an armor check penalty of 0 - that way it won't have penalties to its attack.
