## why paladin?

If someone asked me to bet on the Player's Handbook class that most people would either love or hate, my money would be on the Paladin class. Most people have different feelings about it, but one thing is for sure: they are strong ones. Usually selected by new players, thinking that they will be able to play their dream-knight in shinning armor able to slay dragons, unfortunately they are usually left with a bitter disappointment. From a character optimization view, the class lacks potential. This guide is for those that want desperately to play a Paladin for their fluff, but also need a combat edge for their knightly adventures.

In this guide i will try to explore the paladins and provide as many information as possible on them. Note that i will not focus only on the player's handbook class only, but also on the variant paladins as well. As such, don't be surprised if some feats/classes/abilities that can be only obtained by non good or evil characters are suggested.

## moral dilemmas

The paladin is the base class out of the Player's Handbook that has the most strict alignment restriction. By definition, paladins are always of the lawful good alignment and they don't only have to act in the name of good and order, but they also have a code of conduct that they must abide to.

Before you continue reading the guide, it's important to refresh the definition of alignment, as it is a mechanic that causes a lot of problems within groups. As mentioned in Player's Handbook:

> Alignment is a tool for developing your character's identity. It is not a straitjacket for restricting your character. Each alignment represents a broad range of personality types or personal philosophies, so two characters of the same alignment can still be quite different from each other. In addition, few people are completely consistent.

I have encountered people with different opinions on alignments that range from indifference to extremism. My personal view on alignment is that it's a good mechanic to determine the outcome of certain spells and effects and to give your character a roleplay direction. However, it is not a good mechanic to use if you want to resolve philosophical arguments on ethics or determine which NPC you should punish.

Ethics is a branch of philosophy that investigates questions like "Is this action right or wrong?". Philosophers like [Plato](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plato), [Immanuel Kant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Kant) and [Friedrich Nietzche](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Nietzsche) have been trying to resolve questions like this for thousands or years. Based on these facts, it's understandable that these ethical questions are not going to be solved by the alignment system.

The problem here lies in the simplicity of the alignment system. It uses two axes - good/evil and law/chaos, which is suitable for a fantasy game like Dungeons and Dragons; the alignment system tries to make choices simple and not complicated. This works fine for most classes that do not have mechanical implications, but in the case of paladins and their code of conduct, the ethical simplicity of alignments and the ambiguity of the code do not mix that well.

If you want to play a paladin and your party is cool about it, then great. If you feel that your dungeon master or teammates are punishing you because of your class choice, this is not cool and you should have a talk about it. Remind them that, according to the rules, alignment is not meant to restrict your character and that it should not be taken far too seriously. Additionally, the restrictions that paladins get compared to the benefits that the class provides are just not worth it; you are not playing this class for the mechanical benefits - you are doing it for the style.

## class breakdown

Here's a detail regarding paladin: it's a complicated class. Most of the classes have a degree of complexity to them and some have a deceptively simple class features table, like the cleric or the wizard. A simple look at the paladin's table is enough to understand that there are multiple things going on at the same time, especially at the early levels.

The truth is that unless you just spend all of your levels in the paladin class, you will have a very hard time keeping all your class features in the same power level; this is not generally encouraged in the optimization community, as paladin is already a weak class, so you'll have to specialize to make yourself useful.

Indeed, don't let yourself get fooled to think that most of the abilities of the paladin are acquired at the first five levels. It seems that the class is front-loaded, when in reality each additional paladin level improves many of its abilities. Smite evil, turn undead, spellcasting and special mount are all abilities that are not static.

In order to help you pick up abilities and prestige classes as you progress in the paladin class, I will categorize the paladin's class abilities in four aspects with distinct names. These are the champion, the cavalier, the templar and the commander.

The champion is the warrior aspect; a champion paladin tries to optimize his main combat skill, smite evil, in order to deal high amounts of damage.

The cavalier is the horseman; a cavalier paladin improves his performance in combat by focusing on the synergy between him and his special mount.

The templar is the aspect with the most connection to the divine. A templar paladin uses spells, turn undead, [domain] and [divine] feats to increase his combat prowess.

The commander is the leader of the group. A commander paladin supports his followers by applying buffs and acting as the party face with his skills.

These categories are an abstraction that I have devised and they are meant to give you a direction during character creation and when you need to make a choice at level-ups. They are not to be blindly followed. For example, if your champion just gained a level and you are pondering whether you should get a feat that increases your special mount or your smite ability, think it through; that special mount enhancing feat may be the correct choice for you after all. In this distinction there is room for hybrids and at a certain point it is encouraged.

Here is how the class feature chart should look, with some additional breakpoints that aren't visible in the one in Player's Handbook:

| Level | Special                                  |
| ----- | ---------------------------------------- |
| 1     | Aura of good, detect evil, smite evil 1/day |
| 2     | Divine grace, lay on hands               |
| 3     | Aura of courage, divine health           |
| 4     | Turn undead, spell level 1               |
| 5     | Smite evil 2/day, special mount          |
| 6     |                                          |
| 7     |                                          |
| 8     | Mount advancement, spell level 2         |
| 9     | Remove disease 1/week                    |
| 10    | Smite evil 3/day                         |
| 11    | Mount advancement, spell level 3         |
| 12    | Remove disease 2/week                    |
| 13    |                                          |
| 14    | spell level 4                            |
| 15    | Remove disease 3/week, smite evil 4/day, mount advancement |
| 16    |                                          |
| 17    |                                          |
| 18    | Remove disease 5/week                    |
| 19    |                                          |
| 20    | Smite evil 5/day                         |

## hybrids

### champion - cavalier

### champion - templar

### champion - commander

### cavalier - templar

### cavalier - commander

### templar - commander


## you are not a tank

When discussing builds, there are some standard expressions that people use. This applies to gaming in general, not just D&D. However, when people use the term "tank" to describe their build, most of the times are wrong.

A "tank" usually means that they have lots of defenses, with a focus on hit points and armor class; this is what I call a **passive tank** and assuming that the enemies have half a brain (or your dungeon master doesn't make them intelligent enemies stupid on purpose), they are actually not a good addition for a team, because monsters will just eliminate all of his allies first, ignoring the passive tank.

If you do a quick search on google for paladin, you will find a wide array of pictures of knights in heavy shinning armor, wielding large shields for protection, usually on horseback, on mounts that are equally armored. This leads many inexperienced players into thinking that making the absolute defensive character is the way to go. If you are one of those players, remember that you have to have a purpose; you need all that defense for a reason - for example the real world equivalents of the word "tank" feature high-caliber main guns, turrets and machine guns; the defensive exterior is only there in order to protect the wielders from getting hurt.

An obvious improvement to the passive tank is having abilities that enable him to get enemies to attack him; abilities such as the feat Goad, the tripping maneuver, the feat Standstill, or abilities that enhance your attacks of opportunity by giving you additional conditions to provoke, are all ways to transform the passive tank to an **active tank**. However, while active tanks are not a liability to their team per se, there are many situations that they are simply not optimal.

My position on the "tanking" matter is this: there is no "tank" archetype, unless you have an unwritten "understanding" with your DM. All members of the party must do everything in their power to improve their defenses, i.e. be "tanks". This is the reason why constitution is so important and some people despise races that lose con, such as most elves. Keep in mind that if you have a single party member with awesome AC & hit points, it doesn't mean that all other members are magically safe, unless you have a way to protect them actively.

Bottom line: in D&D, tanking is crowd control.

## general

Initiate of Arvoreen CoV: Add hide and move silently to class skills and some spells. If you have the skill points to spend go for it. Unfortunately you can't get the Shadow Cloak Knight substitution levels, because they're only available to gnomes.
Initiate of Baravar Cloakshadow CoV: Great spells added to your list.
Initiate of the Holy Realm CoV: Bad ability and spells added.
Initiate of Horus-Re CoV: The wild shape ability can fulfill the requirements of prestige classes. Spells are bad though.
Initiate of Milil CoV: Great for multiclass bard/paladins. You need to get perform as a class skill though (through smite to song or able learner probably.)
Initiate of Nobanion CoV: Too narrow. Bad.
Initiate of Torm CoV: The smite ability is also too specific and the spells are even worse.

## champion

Awesome Smite (CC): This is a tactical feat that can be activated whenever you combine power attack with a smite attempt. The good part is that the maneuvers that it offers don't scale according to the penalty that you are taking to your attack roll. This way, you can use it with the minimum penalty (-1). Demolishing smite lets you ignore damage reduction points up to twice your charisma modifier; useful if you are fighting an enemy that uses a weird damage reduction type that you were not prepared for. Overwhelming smite is the maneuver that you are going to be using a lot, if the other two maneuvers do not apply and enables you to transform your smite attempts into trips. Seeking smite is probably the best ability out of the three, as it enables you to ignore any miss chance your foe might have; this maneuver has lots of applications, be it enemy spellcasters that use displacement or creatures that are totally concealed.
Exalted Smite (BoED): smite is good aligned.
Extra Smiting (CW): +2 smites/day (works for crusaders, fists of raziel, and which hunters, how what about ordained champion?).
Ranged Smite Evil (BoED): the name says all.
Sapphire Smite (MoI): +x damage and +x uses per day where x is essentia invested in this feat, also +1 essentia.
Perfect's Vestment (Raven): +1 turn & smite per day for 6k.
Noble Pennon (MiC 166): +2 to smite evil damage.
Mighty Smiting (MiC 39): +2 to attack/damage while smiting, also +1 use per day.
Sacrificial Smiting (FR:CoV): accept a neg level that cannot be overcome to smite evil, technically infinite use.
Holy Avenger (Core): +5 & holy for a little over 100k, also gives sr 15 & can cast dispel magic.
Devastating Smite (Eb:FoW): doubles smite damage.
Chakrabind[Soul] (MoI): +1 smite evil.
Charging Smite (Su) PHB II: If along a charge attack you also smite evil, you deal an extra 2 damage per paladin level (that's 3 points per paladin bonus with the normal damage boost from smite evil). The important part is that if you miss on your charge attack, your smite ability is not considered used. If you are a single classed paladin (you shouldn't) this ability boosts your damage to ridiculous amounts versus evil opponents, up to 60 - otherwise, if you prestige out at 5th or 6th level, you're just receiving 15-18 bonus points of damage. It probably works with pounce (full attack on a charge), too. Replaces Special Mount.
Dragonscale Husk (Ex) DM: Gain a draconic armor that provides a scaling bonus as you go up in levels (but doesn't stack with any other bonus to AC), provides elemental resistances and allows for +2 max dexterity bonus (with an armor check penalty of -4). Not actually optimized, but it does have some bonuses as waving the cost of an actual armor. Replaces all your armor proficiencies.
Holy Warrior CC: Only helpful if you are actually taking a few levels of paladin. Even then, reconsider it, as lesser restoration is a first level spell for paladins and with the 4th level you can use spell trigger items such as staffs and wands, without the need to use magic device them. Feats of note are improved smiting, mounted combat, power attack (also acquired at the level you get access to divine feats, usable to grab divine might later). However note that the Holy Warrior alternate class feature is the only way to get Divine Might at level 4, or any other divine feat, since they all have the turn undead feature as a requirement.
Underdark Knight CC: If you are going to be in an underground campaign, this is worth it. You give up your mount and gain some abilities that depend on your level. Contrary to the name, this may be able to help in an underground campaign, but it applies in many situations. If you're pondering to give up your special mount for this, only consider it if you're willing to delve twelve levels deep into the paladin class, because that's where you receive the earth glide extraordinary ability - the ability to move through earth like a fish through water. While suffocation is not much of an issue, since you only begin suffocating after 2xconstitution (that's not constitution modifier - it's your constitution score), which is a really long time, you can use races that do not need to breathe - undead, warforged, air goblins (from unearthed arcana), to virtually stay in the ground for prelonged periods of time. Additionally, you receive either low-light or darkvision (if you already possess low-light vision), some minor skill boosts and an untyped land speed increase.  
Avenging Strike ToB: Unless if you are going to deal with creatures who possess the evil subtype, take this. Otherwise it's not worth it. Note that this works if the outsider has the evil subtype, regardless of alignment (it means that you can avenging strike paladin outsiders for example that have the evil subtype). Avenging strike is a very elegant feat that would probably be a very popular choice among those builds that favor charisma synergies, but, unfortunately, it can only be used on specific creatures - those outsiders with the [Evil] subtype. Since it requires you to have a good alignment, that probably means that you're thinking of a build featuring the traditional paladin class, so you will almost definitely encounter evil outsiders at some point in the campaign, but whether they will be enough to justify you picking this feat is debatable. Check with your DM - if you're going to delve into the Abyss or Nine Hells, then it's a quite good pick; otherwise it's better to pass on it. Another little detail: it probably is a typo, but, as written, if you use a swift action to empower your attacks, that energy lasts until your next attack - it doesn't have a duration (like 1 round), so you can probably prebuff your weapon with it (although it will be discharged on your next attack, whether you hit an outsider with the [Evil] subtype or not) so that you can use your swift action on something else.
Power Attack PHB: Trade attack bonus for extra damage. Nice feat.
Extra Smiting[Retrain] CW: This is not necessary, but it's there if you are continually using smite attempts. As written, you probably get two additional smite attempts that you can use for various smite class features. It's obviously a good feat for your starting levels and if you get enough smite attempts to use per day, you can retrain it for something better. Unfortunately it requires four points of BAB, so you won't be able to pick it up as a starting feat - where it's probably most needed.
Improved Smiting CD: This is nice if you have a problem with overcoming damage reduction. Also useful if you have also other kinds of smite. Indeed, this is an option if you have problems with damage reduction, but the paladin class is feat-starved, so it's better that you let your equipment take care of it; fortunately you're getting a mild damage boost to your smite attacks, but unless you've got a lot of them, don't bother with this feat; it's only worth taking if you've got a large amount of smite attempts per day and if they are 'special', meaning that they're not aligned, but affect something else, for instance, the smite the Killoren race gets.
Exalted Smite BoED: This is worthless. Just take improved smiting, which gives you a bonus to your damage, too.
Smite Fiery Foe FB: Use this if you are going to encounter fire based creatures, such as fire dragons. This feat is so bad, that even against fire based creatures - that is creatures that have the [Fire] subtype - can be worthless, as it adds just elemental damage, easily negated by spells and abilities. On the plus side, you do get a bonus smite attempt and you can convert other smites (but only from character levels or cleric domains, so Killorens are out) to "smite fiery foe"s, but unless you're convinced that you're going to be constantly battling creatures with the [Fire] subtype at relatively early levels, better stay away from this one.
Ranged Smite Evil BoED: You can use a smite evil attempt through a ranged weapon. Great if you want to play a ranged paladin. The other alternative, is using the elf paladin substitution levels, but obviously that option has two main drawbacks: you've got to be an elf and the weapon selection to deliver smite evil attacks is restricted to longbows and shortbows (with their composite versions), however, it doesn't eat up a feat. Both versions share the same drawback: you can only smite evil with them and you can't use other smite types.
Smiting Power CoV: Smiting power is not very powerful, but it can be used as a connection between your innate paladin powers and special combat maneuvers, should you decide to use them. Between the overrun and the bull rush maneuver, the latter is easier to optimize without sacrificing too much of the resources available to you; selecting some feats (Knockback RoS, Jotunbrud RoF, etc) or items (Brutal Surge enhancement MIC) or even the Dungeoncrusher Fighter variant (just a 2 level dip is required), will greatly increase your bull rushing capabilities and Smiting power will add charisma synergy to the mix.
Awesome Smite CC: Ignore some damage reduction points, trip opponents or ignore miss chances against opponents you smite. Great maneuvers. This feat enables you to use three maneuvers; each of which requires that you make a smite attack while using the Power Attack feat (minimum attack penalty -1). As written, this feat enables you to use the maneuvers, whether your target is valid for your smite type or not. Demolishing Smite will easily cut through any damage reduction - it ignores damage reduction points up to twice your charisma modifier, which, will easily be 6+; Overwhelming Smite is a weird one - if you hit and deal damage with your attack you can treat your attack as though it was a trip maneuver; if you get your hands on Improved Trip somehow, you immediately gain another attack against your opponent! So it's like using a smite attempt to gain a free attack (other certain conditions of course, but it can work) - however note that tripping is not always effective (e.g. against flyers); finally, Seeking Smite will enable your attack to negate any miss chance your opponent might have, which is very useful against many buffs (Displacement for instance).
Divine Might CW: Add your charisma to damage for 1 full round. This provides even more charisma synergy. Great feat. Just to note that Divine Might increases your charisma synergy, but you will be able to use it less than 10 times per day, unless your charisma modifier is really high and you don't have to spend turn attempts to power other divine feats. Obviously, since divine might affects appies to the attacks that you make in a full round, to get the most out of this feat you need to get more attacks per round; however, the Two Weapon Fighting feat line is out, as it requires a lot of dexterity investment on your part, which, as a Paladin, is not a good option. A great solution to get more attacks per round is to acquire secondary natural weapons, such as claws, tail, bite, etc - you will attack with a big penalty (-5 modifier to attacks), but that applies only to your secondary natural weapons - not your original attack sequence. Another note is that if you want to play a Paladin that utilizes ranged weapons (maybe using the elven substitution levels), Divine Might applies to all weapon damage, not just melee ones! Of course, to qualify for it you need to have Power Attack.
Divine Shield CW: Close relative to divine might, this feat makes you a walking fortress and has a pretty nice duration. This is another feat that will enhance your charisma synergy. Unlike Divine Might, Divine Shield has a scaling duration, which increases according to your character level; this enables you to save some turn attempts to fuel other divine feats, as you won't have to activate it each round. The bad news is that you'll have to spend the first round of combat to power up your shield, as activating Divine Shield takes a standard action. If you somehow manage to squeeze two fighter feats in your build (possibly dipping into fighter or psychic warrior) you can grab Shield Specialization PHB II and Shield Ward PHB II; the first is rather uninteresting and dull - it just increases your shield AC by one point with the selected shield group (light, heavy or buckler), but it grants you access to the second feat, which will let you add your shield bonus to AC (remember that figure is enhanced by Diving Shield) to your touch AC and checks or rolls to resist attack options like bull rush, disarm, grapple, trip or overrun.
Divine Vigor CW: If you are wearing heavy armor, your speed will be greatly reduced. This not only pumps your speed, but also provides you with 2 temporary hit points/level. The effect has a duration of minutes/level. Great feat. Actually the feat is good, but the activation is not; if you're going to spend a round buffing, you are not going to do it for some temporary hit points and bonuses to speed; this is only useful if you know that you are going to face an enemy within minutes, which makes it a luxury feat.
Sacred Vengeance CW: If you want to hurt undead more, you can purchase an undead bane weapon for the same effect 24/7. Fortunately, this affects all your melee attacks until end of turn, just like Divine Power.
Sacred Vitality LM: Use a turn attempt to gain immunity to ability damage, ability drain and energy drain? And for 1 minute duration? This is probably a must have. Indeed the feat is great, but it requires a little bit more explanation. First of all, its duration is just one minute and it requires a standard action to activate it, but it grants you protection against ability damage, ability drain and energy drain; needless to say, all these types of attack can be potential threats to your combat prowess; ability damage and drain that target your physical attributes or charisma can limit your power and energy drain directly lowers your saves, skill checks, attack bonuses, hit points and your best (i.e. highest level) spells. In addition, it is useful not only against undead creatures, as it is common with [Divine] feats, but against a wide variety of enemies and attacks (e.g. the psionic power Ego Whip).
Divine Spirit ToB: If you are in a devoted spirit stance, you can expend a turn attempt to heal yourself for 3+ charisma modifier damage. Average. Bad.
Divine Fortune PHB II: On the other hand, this can help in early levels when your saves and charisma won't be too big. It's an immediate action. Later you can retrain it. Unfortunately this is worthless, as it requires a divine caster level of 5, which you won't possess at early levels - skip it.
Ascetic Knight CV: Monk and paladin levels stack for unarmed strike and smite evil damage. Obviously, the main purpose of this feat is to dip into the monk class for 1-2 levels and then use Ascetic Knight to benefit from the increased damage, possibly by getting feats, items and abilities that further increase your base unarmed strike damage. If you're looking to make the best out of the monk dip, take a look at the Overwhelming Attack variant monk from Unearthed Arcana, which can set up a charging base for Shock Trooper and similar feats, the Feign Death or Invisible Fist or Spell Reflection alternative class features if you're looking for ways to get rid of your Evasion ability, the Decisive Strike variant that replaces Flurry of Blows with something that's more useful (you can also combine it with Scorpion Kama from Magic Item Compendium). If you're playing in Eberron, you can also trade your 2nd level bonus feat for the Whirling Steel Strike feat, which lets you treat the longsword as a special monk weapon.

## cavalier

Celestial Mount (BoED): mount gains celestial creature template
Drakkensteed Mount (Sp) DM: Drakkensteeds have a fly speed if you consider that important. They also have trample. Unfortunately it can't command others of its kind. Drakkensteeds are also dragonblood, which can benefit you if you pick certain fits for it (for instance Draconic Aura). Replaces Standard Special Mount.
Spirited Charge Line PHB: If you're looking to play the paladin class in a core-only (or close to core) environment, utilizing a mount and a lance, the iconic 'knight' image, this is a valid way to work towards a respectable damage output. All you'll need is a good source of damage that will be multiplied - your best bet is the Power Attack feat. Of course, you'll
Devoted Tracker CV: Paladin and ranger levels stack for determining your wild empathy bonus and smite evil bonus damage. Also you can designate your special mount as your animal companion and gain both benefits. This is the base feat that is used in builds that are generally referenced as "supermount" or "ubermount"; this is because, by stacking the benefits of an animal companion (generally the one gained from the Ranger class won't do the trick - the animal companion gained by the Beastmaster CV is used instead) and your special mount. The Halfling Outrider CW and the Wild Plains Outrider CV classes are used to continue advancing both your animal companion and special mount features and gain an extremelly powerful mount - it's possible to have a companion with more than 20 hit dice if Unearthed Arcana bloodlines get into the mixture. You can add feats like Exalted Companion BoEDor Dragon Steed DrN for some additional special mount options.
Celestial Mount BoED: It would be better to use the planar level substitution than taking this feat. Nevertheless if you can't for some reason, it's still worth the feat.
Winter's Mount FB: This is worst than celestial mount even though it boosts its constitution.
Dragon Steed DrN: You gain a dragonnel as a special mount.
Handle Animal: I'd skip this one unless you would like to act as an animal tamer. There's no reason to spend more than a few ranks in this skill (in order to qualify maybe for requirements). There's no reason to not be an animal tamer - with a mild investment in the handle animal skill you can generate some really powerful allies, especially early on in your career, that can serve you as mounts, too, if you chose to swap your own for something else.
Ride: Max this if you plan on acquiring the mounted combat feats.
Dismount Attack: If you succeed in a fast dismount attack, you can attack an adjacent opponent as if you have charged him. Requires ride 5 ranks.

## templar

Battle Blessing (CC): paladin spells are a swift action to cast, shame you only get 4th level spells huh.
Exalted Turning (BoED): deal 3d6 damage to turned undead.
Sword Of The Arcane Order (): gain access to wizard/sorcerer spells as paladin spells, see also battle blessing.
Seek Eternal Rest (FR:MoF): +2 to your turn undead level.
Divine Counterspell (Sp) CM: You are giving up your main source of divine power for the ability to hurt spellcasters (and with a penalty to your effective cleric level). This is bad. Replaces Turn Undead.
Rebuke Dragons (Su) DM: This is too campaign specific and you give up turn undead. Bad. Replaces Turn Undead.
Practiced Spellcaster CD: As a paladin you'll have very bad caster level - just half your paladin level; the problem is that if you favor buffs that benefit from caster level (like for duration, effects and so on), practiced spellcaster can be used to pump it up a bit. Remember that if you're planning to use it, it has a spellcraft skill requirement of 4 ranks, which is a cross-class skill for the paladin class.
Winter's Champion FrB: You add the spells from cold and winter domains to your class spell list. The spells are unimpressive and mostly deal direct damage.
Sword of the Arcane Order CoV: This is a gem. One of the best feats for paladins out there. To elaborate on this beautiful feat: it enables you to memorize sorcerer/wizard spells in your paladin slots, using your own spellbook or a borrowed one; in addition your wizard caster level is treated as the sum of your wizard, paladin and ranger levels. So, to list the disadvantages, since the advantages are pretty obvious: you can't dump Intelligence, as you'll need it in order to cast wizard spells through this feat; since you're not going to have a really high intelligence modifier or the ability to use high level spells, you're restricted almost exclusively to buffs; you're restricted to specific deities (Azuth or Mystra), even though that's not really a problem, since Mystra's order, Knights of the Mystic Fire, features some sweet substitution levels; it is unclear whether you can have a spellbook without levels in the wizard (or wu jen) class - if you can only get your own spellbook by dipping those classes, you can either choose to dip or invest in spellcraft and use borrowed spellbooks - be warned that the spellcraft DCs to memorize spells from borrowed spellbooks are quite high, at 15+spell level; the way that the caster level calculation for wizards is worded, seems to debuff caster level and to always set it at wizard + ranger + paladin levels, making feats like Practiced Spellcaster worthless - it wouldn't be that way if the ability was just "you add your paladin and ranger levels to your wizard caster level" - I don't think this is RAI, though, and it will rarely matter, since you'll need to dip 4 levels in the Paladin class anyway. An issue you'd most probably like to clear with your DM is whether the spells you cast using this feat are arcane or divine. In the case they are arcane, you'd have the additional restriction that they are subject to arcane spell failure, but you'll be able to qualify for prestige classes, feats, abilities or items that require you to be able to cast arcane spells and activate eternal wands. In the case they are divine, they are not subject to arcane spell failure, but you'll be able to use them in conjunction with abilities that only work on divine spells (for instance the Divine Metamagic feat, check Complete Divine's errata) and create scrolls of arcane spells that are treated as divine spells (your Archivist party member will love you).
Battle Blessing CC: A gem. Auto quicken nearly everything on your spell list. A must if you are going to value spellcasting. In truth Battle Blessing does not affect nearly everything on your spell list, but over 100 paladin spells benefit from it. Since this feat only works with paladin spells, you'll most probably have to stay in the class, or choose prestige classes that advance spellcasting; this is actually a negative, but you can work something out by selecting alternative class features and abilities that depend on your paladin level (for instance the From Smite to Song feat, or the Charging Smite alternative class feature). What Battle Blessing does for your combat buffs is invaluable - it can be used on helpful combat spells such as Divine Favor, Bull's Strength, Holy Sword, Magic Circle against Evil, Protection from Evil, Shield Other and you are free to full attack or even employ another buff (assuming it originaly had a casting time of 1 round, since you only have one swift action per round, normally).
Divine Metamagic CD: Probably not useful to you as to clerics, you are better off with metamagic rods. I don't know what I was thinking about this - it's obviously very good, but you'll have to commit some resources to make it work. For example, getting the crowd favourite DMM(Persistent Spell) you'll have to reserve three feat slots and the amount of turn undead attempts you will have to sink into this feat will make you unable to take any other divine feats. The main problem is that paladins do not have many spells that are worth it to be made persistent; the most common choices are Bless, Divine Favor, Blessed Aim, Divine Sacrifice, Strength of Stone, Find the Gap, Prayer, Sacred Haven, Blessing of the Righteous. If you are allowed to persist wizard spells by using the Sword of Arcane Order feat, then a whole lot of options open up for you - for instance using the Thunderlance spell which creates a lance of force with great reach made out of pure force, which will let you attack and deal damage using your charisma instead of your strength modifier. If the sourcebook Complete Champion is not available, you can use DMM(Quicken Spell) to quick cast some buffs in-combat, because that will bar access to the Battle Blessing feat. Finally, you can probably make use of DMM(Empower Spell) because there are some combat buffs with variable effects.
Divine Spell Power CD: This requires a special turning roll with a +3 bonus to the roll. If you optimize the roll a bit you can easily get 1-2 bonus to your caster level. Mediocre.
Dragonfire Channeling DM: Not good since your effective cleric level is low.
Profane Lifeleech LM: Spend two turn attempts to deal 1d6 points of damage to all living creatures in a 30ft burst and heal the total amount of damage you dealt. This isn't an offensive feat but more of a healing one. Also it might work if you have tomb-tainted soul as it doesn't state that the healing energy is positive.
Divine Ward PHB II: This is more important to clerics than you.
Persistent Refusal FCII: Your saves are already very high. Taking this can guarantee that you won't be disabled for a lot rounds. It's like a better version of Slippery Mind, but it requires the expenditure of a turn attempt in order to work.
Pious Defiance FCII: I prefer divine fortune that covers all your saving throws. Divine Fortune requires a high caster level, thus, you won't be able to pick it up at early levels; still this fact does not make this feat any better - it scales with levels, but it only help your will saving throw.
Retrieve Spell CC: This is nice especially with things like sword of the arcane order and the like. Unfortunately no. Retreive Spell requires you to already possess two divine feats in order to acquire it, so you can use it to regain some combat spells, but it takes a big toll
Spiritual Counter CC: Too many turn attempts needed.
Initiate of Baravar Cloakshadow CoV: Great spells added to your list.
Concentration: Not particularly useful to you, unless you are planning to be casting spells in battle. However since you will focus on high AC it will pretty difficult to disrupt your spell even then. That is true, but even then, most of your combat spells will be swift action buffs, which you don't have to use concentration for, anyway. Invest in this only if you want to meet a certain requirement - many feats and prestige classes require concentration ranks.
Knowledge (Religion): Spend five ranks in this skill so that you get the synergy bonus, which is great for any character who turns Undead. Synergy bonuses are great, but don't expect that you'll be turning or rebuking Undead creatures effectively, unless you choose to spend some cash on equipment that will enable you to do so. This is still ranked blue however, because it's your one and only skill that identifies creatures, which is important, especially if no one in the party can act as a monster identifier.

## commander

Action Healing (Eb:FoE): spend an action point to empower lay on hands.
Azure Touch (MoI): invest essentia to increase your paladin level for lay on hands.
From Smite to Song (CoV): smite evil to inspire courage, paladin level = bard level.
Gift of Grace (BoED): let others use you divine grace.
Hands of a Healer (BoED): +2 cha for lay on hands only.
Touch of Silver (Eb:FoE): spend a turn use, lay on hands can hurt lycanthropes and evil outsiders.
Unicorn Pendant (FR:MoF): +4 cha for lay on hands only.
Caduceus Bracers (MiC): 5 points of lay on hands can cure fatigue, exhaustion, and ability damage.
Conduit of Life (CC): next lay on hands also heals you for 2d10+cl.
Sacred Haven (SpC): you and allies gain +2 scared to ac, you gain status on your allies, and lay on hands has no range limit on them.
Touch of Restoration (CC): spend lay on hands to cure ability damage using a 2nd level spell, or just cast lesser restoration (srsly).
Divine Spirit DS: You can call a spirit that helps you and your companions. It cannot be attacked except by dispel magic, banishment and dismissal as a summoned creature using your paladin level as caster level. It stays around for rounds equal to your paladin level. Replaces Special Mount.
Curse Breaker (Sp) CM: Give up remove disease and gain remove curse or remove enchantment (by giving up more uses). The good thing is that you can choose what fits better in your campaign and party , remove curse or remove disease, since you're not giving up anything else. Replaces Remove Disease.
Stand Fast: As an immediate action, you can add your charisma modifier to a single saving throw to all allies between 20ft or to any roll to resist a trip, grapple, bull rush, disarm or sunder attack. Replaces Special Mount
Skilled City Dweller: You can replace ride with tumble and handle animal for gather information. The first isn't too hot, but the second one is interesting.
Leadership PHB: This is one of the best feats you can acquire both for flavor and optimization reasons. Most DMs ban this outright. Paladins have a special mount and unless they swap that class feature for an alternative one, they are already looking at -2 points, however, since your leadership score is the sum of your level and your charisma modifier and you're able to receive most positive modifiers to your score just by doing your job right (great renown - fairness and generosity), raising your score high enough to effectivelly get another player character under your control will be extremely easy. Don't forget about followers, too - they can also be used, even though their combat effectiveness will be limited (you'll require resources to keep them around with you and they're too weak to survive direct confortation), unless the situation is a siege of your personal keep, where they will mostly be using ranged weapons. To optimize the Leadership feat even more, you can check out Heroes of Battle, which features some feats that can boost several aspects of the leadership feat (Extra Followers, Improved Cohort, Practiced Cohort, Inspirational Leadership). More sources: Legendary Commander ELH, Epic Leadership ELH, Dragon Cohort DrN, Undead Leadership LM, Might Makes Right RoF.
Draconic Aura DrM: Project a draconic aura. This is very useful and flavors with the auras/buffing effects the paladin already has. Indeed, this is very good feat and fits the class thematically, assuming you've got the [dragonblood] subtype. The best thing is that this feat provides a great deal of versatility: you've got a wide selection of auras to choose from and most will benefit all the members of a party. Obviously you should check with your teammates and choose an aura that boosts the party's most important abilities. The Energy aura is very good to help a primary spellcaster that employs spells of a particular energy type - e.g. a spellcaster that specializes in cold using the Snowcasting feat - that way you can provide him with a pretty good bonus to his difficulty class. Note that the same applies to any ability that has the appropriate descriptor or deals damage of the chosen type, so, for example, it might help a Dragonfire Adept, too; the Insight aura will be mostly useless - the only use I can think of that will benefit a party is if most of your allies grab the Knowledge Devotion feat; if your party features more than one offensive spellcasters, then they will probably love the free Spell Penetration feat(s) provided by the Power aura; Presense boosts the social skills Bluff, Diplomacy and Intimidate - while these skills are all worthwhile, unless your party uses the demoralize combat action, it's not worth it to boost them via an aura; the Resistance aura is good for the first levels - a party that will crusade against pyromaniacs will gladly get the extra protection, but after some levels the energy protection will quickly lose effectiveness; Resolve helps against fear, paralysis, sleep effects and concentration checks, but it doesn't boost any other saving throws - you're already immune to fear, you give a +4 morale bonus to your teammates and getting a +4 max bonus on saves versus paralysis and sleep effects, while useful, isn't good enough; Senses is probably the best non-specialist (that is, if you exclude situations that another aura is more useful, because of your party composition) aura you can pretty much acquire - at the end you're essentially giving everyone a little more than three bonus feats (Improved Initiative, Skill Focus[Spot], Skill Focus[Listen]). Having good spot and listen checks is fine, but the important thing here is the initiative bonus; i don't really like the Stamina aura, but the bonus to fortitude saves is well worth it; Swiftness is another great choice for parties that value mobility (or lack in that sense) - the skill boni are good, but getting +10ft movement speed to all movement modes at an early level (7th) to all of your party members for just one feat is heavenly; and finally, the Toughness aura is obviously not worth it, since it can be easily bypassed by magic weapons.
Goad[Retrain] CV: Great for charismatic front liners. You can attract an enemy and survive since paladins are usually nice tanks, but also save a weak opponent. This feat is not that great, because it has multiple restrictions and only prohibits melee attacks on your teammates. However, it's a great feat for your starting levels and you can opt to retrain it later; this is because it will start to lose effectiveness as you'll start encountering enemies with different movement modes than land speed - for instance any flying creature is difficult to goad, unless you also possess a flying speed or the creature has a large threat range. The controversial thing with this feat is that it is based more on your opponent, than on you (except from the DC of course), because it relies on his or her threat range. This feat is very good against opponents with weak will saves that either have large reach or require mobility to be effective (e.g. chargers); in addition, assuming that your opponent is only dangerous with his melee attacks, you can use this to save a weaker ally, by forcing the enemy attack you.
Daunting Presence[Retrain] LM: A charisma based will save feat that can make opponents shaken. Since most paladins will not have the Intimidate skill as a class skill, if your party employs demoralize/fear tactics and you want to participate, then this feat will make it happen. Note that this has to be used as an opening or finishing move versus an opponent - it makes people shaken, but it has no effect if a creature is already shaken; it arguably works versus targets that are frightened (since shaken + shaken = frightened, your target is no longer shaken), so, for instance, you can open with daunting presence, have someone make your target shaken again and then use your daunting presence once again to make him panicked. Daunting presense has a charisma-based difficulty class and scales as you level up, because it's based on your hit dice; moreover it's a ranged ability - you don't have to be threatening the enemy with your weapons, just to have a staredown contest! As you gain levels, if your enemies are frequently immune to fear or mind-affecting effects, or you just have better things to spend your standard action on, you can just retrain it.
Dilate Aura FCII: Double your aura's range once per encounter for rounds equal to your charisma modifier. Mediocre. Indeed, it's not an ability to die for, but I wanted to note that a paladin with many followers from the Leadership feat will probably make the best use of this feat. Too bad that as written you can only enlarge only one of your auras.
From Smite to Song CoV: Spend a smite attempt to activate a inspire courage effect with effective bard level equal to your paladin level. Average feat. I used to think that, but actually this feat has a number of uses. First of all inspire courage is one of the best bard songs and the most common target of optimization (boosting its bonuses via feats and items); you only spend a feat to get the best class feature of a class and it automatically scales, too! The downside is that it scales according to your paladin level, which is not that good, because you'll normally want to prestige out as quickly as possible. In addition, it requires you to worsip Milil, a deity that offers some interesting substitution levels; if you get the first level of Harmonious Knight, you'll be able to get this feat from your first level (as it requires 3 ranks of perform and the substitution level makes perform a class skill for you).
Dreadful Wrath PGtF: This is a very good feat for every charismatic character. Create a fear aura every time you attack, charge or target an enemy with a spell.
Martial Study/Stance ToB: There are some great maneuvers you can benefit from. Also you get new class skills, the most important of which, i consider to be intimidate from devoted spirit.
Divine Cleansing CW: The bonus is limited to +2 and it's only for fortitude saving throws. Unless your party is consistently making fortitude saves against hazards, better stay away.
Divine Resistance CW: All allies in a 60ft burst gain resistance 5 to cold, fire and electricity. Unfortunately requires divine cleansing and isn't that powerful, so you better skip it.
Glorious Weapons CD: Align melee weapons of your allies in a large area to good/evil. Average feat. It's like casting a limited version of Align Weapon, Mass, which is actually a 3rd level feat. It's not that bad, especially if you regularly find yourself in battle with creatures that have a damage reduction type that  can be bypassed by this feat; for instance some devils or demons.
Sacred Boost CD: This maximizes the next healing spell cast on the subjects affected. Average; you are not going to memorize traditional healing spells.
Sacred Healing CD: This is a very good ability. You effectively provide your allies healing 3*(1 + your charisma modifier). Be careful as this feat affects all living creatures, which includes enemy living creatures. Exactly because it can potentially affect enemies, you need to spend a full-round action to activate it  (!) and it requires 8 ranks in heal, which is not the most essential of skills and the effect is nothing to die for, just more healing, this feat can only situationaly justify its appearance on a paladin build. However note that Sacred Healing doesn't scale according to your levels, only according to your charisma modifier - unfortunately, because of the skill requirement you can't get it at early levels and retrain it later, which would be obviously a lot more useful.
Divine Accuracy LM: You and allies can reroll the miss chance with melee attacks for incorporeal undead. It is too specific to be good, and in any major incorporeal undead campaign you are better off with ghost touch weapons or truedeath crystals.
Profane Vigor LM: Heal an undead ally 2 hit points per cleric level. Even assuming that you can use your paladin level instead of a cleric level, this feat is bad. Just use your deadly touch ability.
Spurn Death's Touch LM: Heal ability damage, remove paralysis effects or negative levels by spending turn attempts. Nice if you are going to be fighting undead, otherwise skip it. It doesn't have the versatility of sacred vitality.
Divine Armor PHB II: Give your armor damage reduction 5/- for 1 round. I don't think it's worth it, unless you couple it with feats that force enemies into attacking you, for instance, the goad feat. Note that this feat requires a divine caster level or 5 (this means, paladin level 10).
Divine Justice[Retrain] PHB II: This is interesting if you are a purely defensive character without large damage outputs. Targeting rogues or melee skirmishers can give you large amounts of damage easily. Also there are effects that diminish damage after it is dealt (fortification armor negates critical hits, damage reduction, fast healing, general healing). This is a perfect feat for your early levels if for whatever reason your damage output lacks (for instance, you might be a member of a small-sized race, a halfling or a gnome, so early levels will be kinda difficult to get by) and you consistently deal with single 'bosh'-type enemies; you can retrain it later for something more useful.
Devoted Inquisitor CV: Smite evil and sneak attack to potentially daze a foe. Mediocre. Actually not a lot of things are immune to being dazed and this ability scales according to your hit dice and your charisma modifier; unfortunately, you have to find a sneak attackable evil creature and use both of the special attacks in a single blow in order just to qualify to activate this ability. Still, some builds, for instance, a Shadowbane Inquisitor build, could find it to be a great addition to their arsenal.
Devoted Performer CV: Paladin and bard levels stack for determining smite evil damage and number of bardic music/day. Unfortunately your bard songs do not get stronger by this feat alone, so you should also consider coupling this feat with Initiate of Milil which does exactly that: stacks your paladin, bard and cleric levels to determine how powerful your bard songs are.
Gift of Grace BoED: Share with your companions some of your divine grace. Not particularly useful.
Hands of a Healer BoED: Not exactly worth a feat. You can buy a wondrous item to the same effect.
Nymph's Kiss BoED: You gain bonuses to charisma related checks, +1 bonus on saving throws for spells and spell-like abilities. Also 1 bonus skill point per level.
Initiate of Milil CoV: Great for multiclass bard/paladins. You need to get perform as a class skill though (through smite to song or able learner probably.)
Craft: This is a skill for peasants, not charismatic leaders! Actually, the craft skill is more useful than I thought it would be. First of all, you can cut down on costs for armor and weapons, which requires pretty low difficulty checks. Then, since you're able to cast spells you can actually make alchemical items, too. Investing many ranks beyond those required for making some standard equipment is not recommended though, since intelligence is a dump skill for this class.
Diplomacy: I'd max out this one. It gives you a lot of social interaction choices and with your high charisma you should be the party's face.
Heal: Great skill to stop your fallen allies from dying. I wouldn't bother investing more than a few ranks, just to be able to make the check if need be. Some feats that have a healing theme require a few ranks in this skill.
Knowledge (Nobility and Royalty): Get this at least to five ranks to gain the synergy bonus on diplomacy checks.
Profession: Again this isn't a skill for a legendary commander. Actually not that true; there are several good choices here that fit thematically with the paladin class, for instance, you could be a captain, so it'd be great if you also had some profession(sailor) ranks; profession(sailor) by the way is one of the rare professions that also have a mechanical aspect - some spells from the Spell Compendium use profession(sailor) and it's useful if you're in a naval adventure. This skill is still ranked red, because it's more of a issue related to your character's theme, rather than optimizing your character.  
Sense Motive: Spend some ranks in this one. It can be used to identify the intents of NPCs you might come across and also has various social uses. Plus it gives you a good synergy bonus.
Healing Hands: Stabilize a character and heal them 1d6 hit points, which may make them functional again. Requires heal 5 ranks.
Never Outnumbered: Demoralize a group of enemies. Requires intimidate 8 ranks.
Social Recovery: Reroll a failed check to improve NPC attitude.
