If you want to summon creatures, then this is the best feat that you can select; it's simple and elegant, but it's able to change a summoned creature's stat block dramatically; just think of the game statistics that it can affect: attack bonus, damage bonus, fortitude save, hit points, grapple check and the other attack maneuvers (like bull rush and trip), skills and the difficulty class of certain special abilities. There are no feats that compare to augment summoning if you want to focus on summoning, no alternatives – this is because the bonuses are solid and they apply universally – even the mighty greenbound summoning will start to lose its effectiveness at high levels, but augment summoning will never let you down and will always stay relevant. There is however a downside to this feat, because it requires you to spend one of your precious feat slots on a bad quality feat – spell focus (conjuration). It's not only that you're not getting much out of spell focus, it's that you have to get it in the conjuration school – which rarely has good spells that allow saving throws; you will find some in the druid list that are worth your while, but you won't find a lot of them. There are two ways of dealing with this – your first option is to skip the feat and instead try to gain the feat's bonuses through alternative means; there are a couple of ways available, like the half-orc substitution levels which let you trade one wild shape attempt per day for augment summoning or animals, or the initiate of Malar feat that gives you the same thing, just without requiring the spell focus. Of course, both of these narrow down other character options like race and deity and they also apply only to animal summons. There is also another way that you can get augment summoning, if you are a shifter: the moonspeaker prestige class offers it at the first level for free, even if you do not have the spell focus feat. Unfortunately, this dip is going to cost you some of your animal companion and wild shape effectiveness, but at least, it's the real deal – you're not getting a type-specific version of the feat like that the other two options give you. Finally, there is another path, that of embracing the spell focus requirement and making it useful. This wasn't possible until the complete mage sourcebook was published, which features some interesting feats for the druid class that list the spell focus(conjuration) as a requirement, feats such as metamagic spell focus and cloudy conjuration, but also imbued summoning from player's handbook II.
