Dragon wild shape is a bit like natural spell. If draconomicon is in the list of your allowed books, then it's almost certain that you will take this feat as your 12th level feat, as it is ridiculously good and takes the wild shape ability at a whole other level. First of all dragons are smart creatures that are capable of speech, so this is a point that you need to resolve with your dungeon master. I'm inclined to say that you still need natural spell in order to cast spells, but if you can communicate while in wild shape, then this saves you from a lot of hassle. Secondly, you are able to wild shape into the forms of small and medium size dragons, but the tradeoff is that you receive all of their extraordinary and supernatural abilities. You can't receive the spell-like abilities that dragons receive, but dragons have some awesome supernatural abilities. My favorite is the shadow blend ability that provides you with cover, but you can find a lot of strange abilities and immunities, especially if you read through the planar dragons. In the monster manual, before chromatic and metallic dragons, their common extraordinary and supernatural abilities are listed and those are: keen senses (darkvision 120ft), blindsense 60ft and sometimes frightful presence and spell resistance, if they are old enough; whether these common abilities are because of their type or not is a little bit open to interpretation. But being of average size in your wild shape form isn't always a penalty – it's kind of a mixed blessing. You can still use weapons, armor and other clothing without a problem, so it's perfect if you want to keep your monk's belt without a wilding clasp. Finally, the dragon wild shape feat is primarily used by druids of the summoner archetype, as the dragon forms have awesome defensive capabilities. However, medium size dragons also receive a high number of natural attacks – 1 bite, 2 claws and 2 wings, which you can enhance with greater magic fang; since dragons are able to use weapons, they would also benefit from iterative attacks, backed up by their secondary natural attacks. The best dragon forms for wild shape can be found in the wild shape part of the guide.
