The main problem of the summoner archetype is the fact that the summon nature's ally line of spells have a casting time of 1 round. It's clearly mentioned in the player's handbook, under 'Casting a Spell' on page 143: 'A spell that takes 1 round to cast is a full-round action. It comes into effect just before the beginning of your turn in the round after you began casting the spell. You then act normally after the spell is completed.', so, assuming that you are already wild shaped into a form, in the first round of combat most of the times you will state that you start casting a summon nature's ally spell and finish your turn. It's important to remember that you don't have to make any decisions at that point - all spell variables are selected when you finish casting the spell, which will take place just before you start your next turn.

However, it's easy for opponents to disrupt your casting during that time, as they will all act before you finish casting the spell. This means that you need to take some protective measures in order to avoid disruptions. The easiest (and the one that requires the least resources) would be to max out your concentration skill, but this is something that doesn't exactly deal with the problem - it's probably your last line of defense, because if you fail the roll, the spell fizzles. Another good investment would be to select one of the defensive aerial forms as your wild shape form of choice; there are many good options that will boost your armor class and since they're flying they will keep you away from the dangers of melee combat; the dragon wild shape feat is particularly good at this - many dragons have great natural armor, average dexterity scores (around 13-15 at medium size) and some tasty supernatural abilities (e.g. a shadow dragon's shadow blend that gives you cover).

Last, but not least, there is a method that treats the problem by bypassing it altogether. That is to somehow reduce the casting time of your summon spells from 1 full round to less than that. There is a method of doing this even in core, but it is very expensive and reserved for the higher levels - quicken spell, but it will get the job done. Outside of core there are some options, but they usually come with certain limitations; for instance, available through the shifter substitution levels is the beast spirit, which replaces the animal companion but gives you certain benefits according to your level - at level 12 you get the rapid summons ability, which makes you able to cast any summon nature's ally spell as a standard action. Another one is the chronocharm of the uncaring archmage from magic item compendium; it is cheap trinket that functions once per day and lets you reduce the casting time of a spell from a full-round action to a standard action. Finally, there is the option of the rapid spell metamagic feat, which everyone can use.

Druids are able to cast the summon nature's ally line of spells spontaneously, so it's not so bright to prepare them - instead you could prepare a utility spell in its place and if it's not needed during the day, you can just transmute its energy spontaneously into a summon nature's ally spell. Many alternative class features alter or replace your ability to cast summon nature's ally spontaneously; unless you really know what you are doing - maybe you need it to qualify for a prestige or feat, or your build is planned around this alternative feature, this is almost universally a bad choice, because it is going to cost you a big chunk of your utility.

However, there is an exception to not preparing the summon nature's ally spells - it's when you need to apply metamagic feats to them; then you're left with no choice but to prepare the metamagic version of the summon when you are memorizing spells. I'd like to note that in the player's handbook under 'Cast a Spell' at page 143, it describes how clerics must take more time to spontaneously cast a metamagic version of a cure or inflict spell, but there is no mention of druids casting spontaneously using metamagic feats. One could argue that a druid would be able to use this rule just as clerics can, but it wouldn't do much good - the summon nature's ally spells already take a round to cast, so enhancing it with a metamagic feat would take its casting time to 1 round + 1 full-round action, which is a lot of time to be casting in battle. However, if you have found a way to reduce the casting times of your summon spells as described in the previous paragraph, for instance, using the shifter substitution levels, then you would be able to cast metamagic'ed summon nature's ally spells as full-round actions; note that full-round actions take place in the same round that you start casting and they differ from 1 round casting time which take place just before the beginning of your next round.

A very good investment for the spellcaster druid are the metamagic rods. There are many reasons for this; you receive free metamagic in a class that is very tight on feats and moreover, there are no options to reduce the level adjustment on spells, like arcane classes can using arcane thesis and similar effects. Additionally, the druid spell list has a large amount of long lasting buffs and by picking a couple of cheap metamagic rods of extend spell you can make them last a full or even two days in some cases. Finally, they don't reserve a body slot - you just have to hold them, so if the form that you have wild shaped into has some sort of hands, then you can use them without a hassle.
